Incoming livestream: We have a fan, that's great. Hey everybody, this is the last talk of the day. This was an epic day. I learned a lot today. I wish this conference was held back in November, could have saved me and Glenn a lot of work along the way. I'm Bob, this is Glenn. Say hi, Glenn.
Incoming livestream: Hi, Glenn. And, we're both on the adversary engineering and R&D side of gray noise. We call ourselves Gray Noise Labs because we're not very clever about naming things. And, our team crafts and deploys detection rules, we call them tags.
Incoming livestream: We craft detection environments, which is a really fancy phrase for we deploy honeypots, and we hunt for threat actors and for zero days in our data. And we're here today to talk to you about the newest member of our team.
Incoming livestream: Orbee.
Incoming livestream: Orbi is an internal AI-powered threat intelligence analyst that helps us make sense of what's happening on our planetary-scale global observation grid. And the truth is, as you're gonna hear, we were overwhelmed trying to find truly meaningful new signal in all the noise that we capture. And that's how Orbi came to be. So we're gonna talk to you about what Orbi is, why we literally had to build it.
Incoming livestream: the lessons that we learned while bending it to our collective will, and the outcomes that we achieved after building it. And we may talk about futures if we have time left.
Incoming livestream: But we're gonna tell you all we can about our friendly neighborhood spherical spelunker, and we've got some goodies to give you as well. Feel free to go to this right now, because there's some slides you're going to need to look at, the things I'm there for, because we realize these screens just aren't going to show them. And you're looking at screens anyway, so, like, feel free to do that. And I'll use Zoom people, get to see them, or everybody else, so you guys have fun.
Incoming livestream: for those things. And…
Incoming livestream: Oh, good, I actually made it big enough. So, Orbi's actually gonna do a threat hunt while we're talking to you today. It takes around 14 minutes, so hopefully we'll get done in time to co-join it. I found some weird base… double base64 encoded stuff, and Orbi's gonna go look through our fleet of honeypot data to figure out what it is without me intervening with it at all. And we'll show you the progress throughout, and hopefully to be done with this at the end, and we can see what it is.
Incoming livestream: Now, Orbi turns out to be a reverse origin story. Normally, the hero causes villains to be created. In this case, Orbi was born out of necessity due to the villain known as React to Shell.
Incoming livestream: This is… this thing was terrible. How terrible? This is how terrible. It came on the scene back in December of 2025. It was bad. It was… it wasn't as bad as Log4J, but it was pretty bad. And this is just an example of the data that we saw every single day, the number of sessions coming in.
Incoming livestream: And the onslaught that we had to deal with ever since then, too, because this goes to, like, just last week.
Incoming livestream: Everybody tried to sling React to shell payloads at whatever they could on the internet to get their share of all the things Census inventoried that was out there for these things.
Incoming livestream: And by January 6th, we had observed over 8,200 unique IPs from over 1,000 ASNs.
Incoming livestream: that were slinging 70,000 completely unique payloads, trying to compromise React to Shell, and I just felt compelled to note, this is one of more than a few of, with the help of Claude, AI-generated payloads, and we can talk to you about payloads, we have a website you can go to explore those as well.
Incoming livestream: With massively diverse network fingerprints.
Incoming livestream: And if Glenn or I had tried to do this stuff on our own, without the help of something else, it would have driven us crazy, and as you can see, Orbi was kind of pissed at us for having to do this work as well. So this is Orbi. This is the Nutrition Facts for Orbi. If you have that linked up as well, there's a bigger version of this out there, and we're gonna go through some specifics, but you can find a lot more in the repo as well.
Incoming livestream: And, it runs in a very customized clog code environment. We're gonna throw that away soon and build our own, because we've reached the limits of what clog code can actually go do.
Incoming livestream: It coordinates between 12 and 16 MCP servers.
Incoming livestream: And around 7-plus investigations, which we are going to cover a couple here. However, with all that, it's a really light footprint. Most of the work is done in remote servers, like Archemy or our API. Local DuckDB does all the analysis, and you'll see why in a minute, and the LLM takes care of a lot of work for us as well, too. And the goal for this is to save us a bunch of time.
Incoming livestream: deliver structured, reproducible, and validated, that's because of him, threat hunting analyses and other artifacts that uses our data. And you can see all the other stuff that we actually have to go to do that.
Incoming livestream: Yeah, so Bob started the story, but you can, you know, to reframe that again, why does Orbi exist? And it's because we are tired. And here's why, as we have a look at just a few seconds of PCAPs and sessions that we see on our fleet on a PPU map, because everyone loves PPU maps.
Incoming livestream: That was a hackathon project. Over the… just in the last 90 days, we're looking at 3… like, we have a fleet of over 3,000 sensors, 90-plus countries, 3,500 detections, 200 attacker profiles, and those are growing by the week, pretty much.
Incoming livestream: And then, underneath all that, growing by the second, again, over the last 90 days, we're talking 22 terabytes of packet captures, 32 terabytes of session information, and 20 million Elasticsearch documents. So, this is what one small team at a startup is responsible for sifting through the noise to be able to find the signal, to be able to deliver the protections to our customers and see what's growing.
Incoming livestream: going on on the internet. So, in the end, we scaled our fleet, but the scale is what broke us. So…
Incoming livestream: We built Dorby.
Incoming livestream: It's a good thing Orby never gets tired. Nope. So, one thing I am still stunned by in 2026 is that folks get tripped up
Incoming livestream: that these LLMs don't come preloaded with everything you need, and they just dismiss them outright. Even the ones that have been purpose-built for that, like, I won't mention some of the Security Foundation models, but they're not great, we've tried them all. And even these fancy new ones that came out in November that we're all, like, singing the praises of, they're good, but they don't have everything that we need, as you just heard, too, to do what we need it to do. And I liken this to the scene in The Matrix where Tank is uploading
Incoming livestream: jiu-jitsu into NEO. That's the problem that we're trying to solve, that we've all… that you've heard throughout today trying to solve. Orby starts with an empty head every single time, just like Claude does. You can give it memory, but it still fires up with an empty head. For our threat hunting context, it's actually, by default, about as smart and helpful as, like, a 13-year-old with access to both a flamethrower and Wikipedia, so not really, not really helpful.
Incoming livestream: So the skill system is how we load it up. And we have individual skill directories, and each one is a structured system prompt and associated resources and tools
Incoming livestream: that define workflow phases that Orbi's going through. Now, the Orbi that we fired up before, it's gonna go through about 6 workflow phases. We may get to see a little bit of, like, workflow 2 or 3 as we check in on it in a minute. There's mandatory constraints. There's definitions of anti-patterns, because you gotta tell it what it shouldn't do, not just what it should do.
Incoming livestream: And output specs, so we get the precision output that we need for ourselves and for the customers and our partners that we give it to, in particular domains.
Incoming livestream: I tried, and Glenn has tried, to keep the skills mostly in natural language so that anybody on the team can work with them, but there's SQL and Bash and Go code and other things associated with them as well, but we really tried to make it as code-lite as possible.
Incoming livestream: So, we're not gonna have a chance to go through all of these things. Please talk to us afterwards, I'll show you everything that we can show you. We're gonna talk about the TAG triage skill and the census enrichment ones in detail.
Incoming livestream: But, let me talk about the other ones. The threat hunting one is what Orbi's doing, so you're gonna see that at the output of that, so we won't talk about that much. We have a markdown writing skill, because it turns out Claude sucks at Markdown. It may look like it does, great job, it doesn't, so we actually had to build custom markdown skills so it does really good precision markdown that translates well to PDF and to Google Docs, unfortunately.
Incoming livestream: We do… we have a PCAP analysis skill, because we capture a ton of PCAP, as Glenn mentioned, and we need to help it understand how to do… work with it. We're going to give it tools, too, in a little bit, to work with them, too.
Incoming livestream: For anyone that works with out-of-band security testing domains, OAST domains, we give it a skill to know everything it needs to know about those domains and how to work with them, and tie infrastructure together with that, along with the MCP server that you'll see soon, too.
Incoming livestream: VirusTotal, you all know what that is, you wouldn't be here if you didn't know what that is. And he's gonna drone on for, like, 2 minutes about findings validation, because he cares about stuff like that, so I'll let him do that later. So this is, the tag tree scale, that's how Orbi works.
Incoming livestream: You can't read that, so basically, if you didn't get the URL before, go for it there, because you can see it. We have over 3,500 detection rules, tags.
Incoming livestream: We need to know what's important at any given moment in time, and especially, like, what was important from yesterday to today, or over the weekend, or even from a particular defined time period. So that's what we did. We… we helped Orbi with a skill.
Incoming livestream: understand how to go do what it needed to go do to do that. And it gives me briefings on a regular basis for those. One thing to kind of call in mind, there's been a theme throughout the conference, and it's kind of… it's kind of bittersweet to go last for the whole talk, but that gives us the privilege of kind of pulling in some of the conversations that have happened earlier in the week.
Incoming livestream: But there's been a theme of, like, how these skills are so important, and that, you know, humans are still very involved in the meaningful output using AI. And this is actually a really good call-out to that. I don't really compliment Bob a lot in person, or virtually, actually, but he built this skill. So Bob has a data science background, if you're not familiar with his work, you've probably seen it somewhere.
Incoming livestream: But he built this skill, the language model didn't figure out how we want to do the Z scale analysis and stuff, so he built the skill that let Orbi do the thing in a way that works for us. So, basically, you know, Bob is smart.
Incoming livestream: Sorry, I had to say that. Bob is smart, but Orbee's fast, working all the time. So, by putting those things together is what really leveled up the game. So, just kind of another plus one to what we've been hearing about how skills and human-driven skills, and putting intentionality in kind of how you develop those skills really matter for meaningful use of this. So, I'm slow? Just move on. I'm slow. No, no, just move on. Okay, alright. You know Q1 review times… I said you were smart, it's fine.
Incoming livestream: So…
Incoming livestream: The one thing I want to call out to this is this is completely modifiable. He created a preferences system for Orbi that lets us tune it without changing the core skills, and a little thing happened on Saturday that everyone probably realizes, which changes things up from an internet perspective. So, we actually worked with Orbi to craft a specialized preferences to do an analysis of conflict.
Incoming livestream: basically anything associated with the conflict. You can talk to us about what it actually did. This is an example of one of the things it did to create what's out there. Those are structured things that it outputs. Again, we can talk about that there, but we now can separate
Incoming livestream: the conflict-related stuff from the rest of the stuff we have to care about. By the way, while the conflict's been going on and you're all looking over there, the ransomware attackers have been having a great time building an inventory, so you might want to watch that in your orgs when you go back.
Incoming livestream: The other one, I want to give a shout-out to Census, because we… our data's great, I love our data, we got great insights from our data, and then when we plugged Census into this data, it leveled it up like crazy.
Incoming livestream: They have global… if you don't know who they are, they've got global internet scan data. It puts it at our fingertips and puts it at Orbeez's fingertips, and we get to turn IPs into full infrastructure profiles.
Incoming livestream: We use that, as well as our JA4, which is a new way of identifying network fingerprints, and those OAST domains I talked about. And we can map actual attacker infrastructure better than we have ever been able to do before. Well, okay, or we can.
Incoming livestream: To be honest about it. And, as an example, so you can see that report there, and I want to just call out this one, because this is in the repo as well.
Incoming livestream: It found a cluster in a Canadian hosting provider of… it was a huge cluster, and 2,000 of those nodes were slinging gigantic scads of credentials against SonicWells for the past 70 days. This is something we just found last week. We actually gave all this data to the CCCS, and they're hopefully gonna shut it down.
Incoming livestream: Along with that, though, we actually worked with Orbi. The idiots did leave their whole Go profile, like, thing… path open to their proxy network, so we made… Orbi and I managed to dig into it, profile the whole thing, and we could see exactly what it would go do. I kind of want these proxies, they're really good. I hate saying nice things about bad guys, but this is a really great proxy network. You all should try to tap into it before they shut it down.
Incoming livestream: You know about skills, so they're just text files with SQL and Bash and stuff, so I'm not gonna go into it if you saw that. I just want to prove that we do work, so we've been working for the past couple weeks on modifying these things. I think we tweak the skills almost every single day, and do not judge me by my commit messages. That is not nice. I'm judging.
Incoming livestream: Let's chicken on Orbi. Wow, it made it to Phase 4 already, so it's about to do the final report. It has gone through, grabbed that IP address, looked it up in Census, looked it up in VirusTotal, combined it all together, got the job for us, did whatever it could, and we're gonna see, it probably also did a bunch of fun stuff on the back end that maybe we might not have done or done as fast.
Incoming livestream: It's back to the Matrix for one more second. There's that scene near the end where Trinity and Neo drop into the pocket construct and just load up guns. Lots of guns. And MCPs are that scene. An LLM with the right tools.
Incoming livestream: And it can get the job done really, really well.
Incoming livestream: So, Orbit connects to a dozen or so of these things, some are in-house, I'll walk through some of them, some we're converting to in-house because reasons, and if you give it access to the right data, it can do things like, hey, here's another payload, and then give us a fully sourced campaign investigation.
Incoming livestream: So these are the tools that we give, that we gave it. There's a little more, but these are the ones that matter the most. We work with ground truth data, you've heard that a lot today, which I really appreciated hearing that other people are doing that, too.
Incoming livestream: Archemy, which is kind of like Wireshark for internet-scale data for us, and our GrayNoise API data. That's our ground truth. That's where we need to get things from. The JA4 MCP server has every single thing I know, and he knows, and my team knows about JA4, which are the fingerprints on the network that these things talk to. This helps us connect tissue in the infrastructure that's out there. Same thing for the OAST domains. I worked with a friend and customer
Incoming livestream: over at Sandia, we baked every single thing we know about these domains into an MCP server, which you're getting a link to today, because you all can use this. It's a command line tool. You're going to want to dig into that OS. Yeah, it's actually really important. We use DuckDB for analytics, because friends don't let friends let LLMs do their own analytics, because they suck at everything if you don't give them tools.
Incoming livestream: Glenn and myself and a bunch of others have a ton of knowledge about how to do PCAP analysis, and we gave it T-Shark and wrapped an MCP server around it with that 30 years of information to let it dissect and do what it can with PCAPs, because we sometimes have to go into those, too.
Incoming livestream: Suricata, same thing, tool thing, virus total, you know what that is. Going back to Census platform and threat hunting, again, just a shout out to them, it's leveled up our analyses, and their MCP servers are awesome.
Incoming livestream: We did have to write that skill to use it, though, so it's kind of awesome. And I also have to shout out to Feedly. If you're not using Feedly CTI, this is not a commercial, it really provides all the external context that we need to make this whole thing really, really smart.
Incoming livestream: And one last Matrix scene, since this was for hunting in the Matrix. Near the end, Neo sees that helicopter losing control before it actually crashes. He asks him what he sees coming, not what's already happened. And that's the frame for this section, safety as prevention, and validation as detection.
Incoming livestream: So, going along with Bob's…
Incoming livestream: Matrix reference, because I was forced into that. What happens when there's a glitch in the matrix? And thinking about this from the other side, for me, it was a confident wrong answer reaching a stakeholder who then takes action on that information. And in our space, this can cause real harm, physical or virtual.
Incoming livestream: So, how do we stop it from doing dumb things?
Incoming livestream: And then how do we get it to tell it on itself, or understand when it does those dumb things anyway, even though we asked it not to?
Incoming livestream: So, in the real world, we have guide rails and guardrails, so kind of mimic this a bit in our Orbi. Not… I guess no one else here has really named their…
Incoming livestream: Alright, well… You should. Yeah, give it a name, it helps.
Incoming livestream: So that, in Orbi, it exists with, like, guard hooks, so those are just shell commands that were kind of policing the behavior that the models, you know, you're like, please don't do this, but it's gonna do it anyway. Using a guard hook kind of just terminates that process right away and makes it move on, so it's just a safety check. Decision trees, that's simply just going A to B to C to make sure it's doing the order properly. You can think of that as, like, you can't have dessert before dinner.
Incoming livestream: Bulletproof patterns. We're traditionally used to code, which has kind of a go-no-go outcome, but writing does not.
Incoming livestream: And for, like, an example of a bulletproof pattern we're using here is just timestamp conversions. Like, there's a lot of ways to do that, but, like, don't think about it, just do it this way and move on, please.
Incoming livestream: And then checklists. I don't think it's really surprising to think about AI being very Type A, but it helps to just embrace that. So give it a checklist.
Incoming livestream: make it a, you know, check these off as you go, this is what you should do, and then at the end, at least you're not making assumptions about what it did, because you expected it to do it. Like, it will, you know, ensure that it at least covered the bases that you had expected it to do.
Incoming livestream: But those are the guardrails, but guardrails don't prevent crashes, they change just what happens after the crash happens, and sometimes they can even make the crash worse. So, how do you prepare for those eventual failures?
Incoming livestream: you crash test it. You build detections. So, in Orbi, again, this looks like a few things. Footnotes, like old-school footnotes, super helpful here. You can have a subject matter expert reviewing a report, have the footnote… make the footnote really accessible, like with a URL or something, to go to the actual data source, just, you know, check for some hallucinations, and you can get a really quick feel for the vibe of the report and the accuracy, and start building, or losing
Incoming livestream: confidence in its output. Logging everything, we are cybersecurity after all, right? Running assessments, this one's kind of fun.
Incoming livestream: You can kind of think of it as therapy for your agent. You ask it, like, how did this go? Like, what was hard for you? What could have made this better? How could we have sped this up? And it will answer, and it will engage with you. So you can… I mean, don't get psychosis, but so you can take that, and then move those findings further up in your skills, you know, kind of shift left mentality.
Incoming livestream: To make this work more effectively downstream.
Incoming livestream: The validator, I'm gonna touch on this on the next slide, but essentially, you know, taking a finished report, extracting every claim is how we, implemented this, and then using a completely different model
Incoming livestream: revalidate those claims and look for inaccuracies, and give feedback on, you know, maybe it's a 1% or half a percent off because we're dealing with live data, so when it re-queried, like, there's more now, because it's been 10 minutes since the last query, so that's okay. Or sometimes it's like, yeah, I did the math wrong, my bad, I can't do, you know, they suck at dates, maybe. And then, we've heard this a lot this week, which is extremely encouraging.
Incoming livestream: a human in the loop. You're still responsible for the output of these model… of these, reports. It's your company, it's your brand, it's your reputation, whatever.
Incoming livestream: So you have to stand behind it, you can't just outsource all of that risk and liability to that. So, I think of this as a… like, if you have a self-driving car and it crashes into a street lamp, it's still your problem. It's still going to be your headache, you're still responsible for what happened there.
Incoming livestream: So, as soon as Orby started producing real output, my first question was, you know, how do… again, how do we stand behind this? How can I trust this thing? And early on, I started engaging with it, asking it questions.
Incoming livestream: how do I know this is correct? Because now you're calling yourself out. And it got a little sassy with me, which I appreciated, actually, so I was like, okay, we've got… So did I. So did I, actually, yeah. Yeah, we got something to work here. But yeah, so then I started making a skill for that. The validator is clearly what we call it, but… So running the validator on some early reports.
Incoming livestream: It had some findings, like 78 claims extracted, less than half were verified. Like, that's alarming. In one case, it made up tag names. So, for gray noise, tags are the root of our findings and our output. Making up tag names is really bad. And it turns out, after investigating that, the model was summarizing the tag names to try and be helpful, but then, by the end of all of this run.
Incoming livestream: the tag names were all different, so it had made up a bunch of tag names. So, again, take that information, put it in a skill, tell it not to summarize or alter or trinicate tag names, and problem-solve. So you just have to kind of engage with it. And then it also just added something to this as a Kev once. I can't explain that one, I don't know if it has a crystal ball. I should have actually checked to see if it got added by now, but anyway, that was interesting. But it was an easy find, because on the revalidation…
Incoming livestream: It was like, it's not there. Like, alright, fix it.
Incoming livestream: Yeah, so like I said, the goal is just to reduce what the validation finds by taking those learnings and moving them further up in the chain.
Incoming livestream: Cool, so we're pretty much almost at time, so I'll go through this real quick, just to show you it's a real thing. These are linear tickets that Orbeez created over the past around month and a half, when it's found stuff and told us to go do things with it. And it's really good at doing that, because it told me directly, I'm supposed to go file this GitHub takedown notice because it found malware on GitHub, and I had to go do that.
Incoming livestream: I don't like that, because, like, Microsoft never takes anything down, but that's just another thing. At least it had the nicety to give me what I should tell it when I did that, and I actually did it. I think that counts as human in the loop, though. It might, it might. It did it, but then I kind of restart the same session every day to keep memory, so the next morning, I fired it up, it's like, did you file that ticket? And, like, I had to paste the URL for it to actually know I did that, so…
Incoming livestream: the error of our AI overlords are actually here. I actually don't need to go through this slide, because you've heard it from almost everybody today. This is great. My one takeaway, so this is our manifesto, how to design what your elements are going to go do, it's all… and this one's up there as well, too. I'm just gonna say, assume these things are gonna do something really stupid and plan around it. Give it data, tell it what to do, retell it what to do, tell it what not to do, and then the last thing I'll say is.
Incoming livestream: The last one is also important to save money. We do the real hard work on Opus 4.6, and we do all the lightweight work on either Haiku or Sonnet to take things a little bit cheaper. It's been really cool this week to see, like, we brushed over that slide really quickly, and all this is online, so you can see it later. Oh, and here it's running his stupid findings valid. It takes so much time, who cares about validation? I mean, seriously. But it's been cool this week to see how we've all kind of come to the same conclusions for that manifesto, which is why we could brush over it.
Incoming livestream: So I'm a little bit more optimistic at the end of this conference than I was at the beginning. Yeah, so we're not going to go through the report here, we didn't think we'd have time for it. The report that it made is up there, you'll see it, it's pretty easily. You've got a skill you can run against Census MCP server, which you should do, because it's got great contextual data. You've got a free Suricata MCP server. If you work with Suricata, it's great for iterating through testing rules and testing PCAPs, etc. And you've also got a OOST domain
Incoming livestream: command line tool and MCP server as a result of this, too. So you got a lot of gifts. And this is all real, too, so, like, feel free to use it and, like, go hunt and look in your environment. And this is how you get ahold of us. We really suck at social media, so that research at granoise.io is probably what you should do. And feel free to, you know, file issues and stuff on the GitHub stuff, because we're gonna keep making these things better, and you can help us make it better, too. So, thank y'all. Appreciate it.
Incoming livestream: open source, and a recap of the themes of the day. Great way to end. Nailed it. Let's do questions.
Incoming livestream: Come on. No questions? Oh, here we go, great. There will be questions. It always takes 7 seconds.
Incoming livestream: Actually, a question that I have been wanting to ask, and you're the lucky ones to get it. So, everybody these days seems to be using cloud code.
Incoming livestream: Orchestrate the agents, work over the agents.
Incoming livestream: Have you thought, and have you tried to use, like, something like Langraph, Langtain, instead of… Yes. That's an awesome question, and as I mentioned, we have hit the limits of clogged code, because it was meant for something else completely different than what we're trying to do with it. We worked with it, because it's free, and it's been great, and it's helped us get to where we are. We need to create our own threat hunting agent framework that knows what
Incoming livestream: what to go do. So you're… yeah, so we are absolutely going to explore that. We are probably going to try to do our own with Go first, because I like writing Go code, weirdly enough. Oh, actually, I like… okay, that's not true anymore. I like working with Claude code to write Go code now.
Incoming livestream: I still like writing code, but I like it better when it can help me go do that. So yeah, that's a great question, and I would… for anyone that's trying to do this in-house, start with Claude code, it's the best thing out there. You're gonna outgrow it, and you should really consider moving to something else, but the great thing is, you have a friend to help you. Like, Claude's my buddy, and it can help you guys do it too, so it's great.
Incoming livestream: So, I follow up to that. When do you outgrow it?
Incoming livestream: What are the limitations? When do you outgrow it?